README.md, before:

# Flutter Bitmap

A minimalist [Flutter](https://flutter.dev/) package to help bitmaps operations.
The focus here is to provide a cool bitmap manipulation interface.

The package standard format is [RGBA32](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RGBA_color_space).

For now, things like format encoding, exif and multi-frame images are not the concern of this package. If that is your need, check [`image`](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image).
Some of the algorithms here are heavily inspired by this awesome lib.

## Why this exists?

I started to use [dart image](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image) to create [LetsPicture](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture/) (cool app, check it out) but since the beginning I've noticed that the performance was really bad.
[Dart image](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image) has its own Image format, so between decoding, putting some transformations and then displaying the result on the app you had to convert the image two times (at least).

So this package is just this: We deal [bitmaps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BMP_file_format) (duh) and we focus only on Flutter use cases.

`bitmap` takes some advantages from Flutter:
- Every image is decoded to [RGBA32](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RGBA_color_space) by the framework trough ImageStreamListener;
- With this package you can easily take advantage of stuff like [compute](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/foundation/compute.html) ([Isolates](https://www.didierboelens.com/2019/01/futures---isolates---event-loop/)) on only the manipulations you want in order to free the ui thread of heavy computation.
- [Niks](https://github.com/renancaraujo/niks) Want to create your own image editor? Niks and bitmap are awesome for the job.

## Alternatives

#### Dart image

As mentioned previously, [`check on pub`](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image).

#### Flutter Built in ColorFilter class

Flutter has a powerful [ColorFilter](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-ui/ColorFilter-class.html) class (that came from [skia](https://skia.org/user/api/skpaint_overview#SkColorFilter)) which can be used to put some color corrections when painting stuff on canvas. You can use a matrix to correct color (Some matrix examples [here](https://docs.rainmeter.net/tips/colormatrix-guide/)).
Not every color transformation can be done though the matrix, though. 

## Basic usage

### 1. Image to Bitmap

Everything is around the [Bitmap](https://pub.dev/documentation/bitmap/latest/bitmap/bitmap-library.html) class. You can get an instance of that from any [ImageProvider](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/painting/ImageProvider-class.html).

```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';

Bitmap bitmap = await Bitmap.fromProvider(NetworkImage("http://pudim.com.br/pudim.jpg")); // Notice this is an async operation
```

##### You can create from a headed [Uint8List](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/Uint8List-class.html):

```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';

Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.fromHeadful(imageWidth, imageHeight, theListOfInts); // Not async
```

##### Or a headless:

```dart
Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.fromHeadless(imageWidth, imageHeight, theListOfInts); // Not async
```
This is useful when you are dealing with the [Uint8List](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/Uint8List-class.html) that [ByteData](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/ByteData-class.html) generates.

##### You can even create a blank one

```dart
Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.blank(imageWidth, imageHeight);
```
This creates a black, full transparent bitmap.

### 2. Applying some transformations

Let's put some contrast, brightness and  increase saturation
```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';
import 'package:bitmap/transformations.dart' as bmp;

Bitmap brightBitmap = bmp.brightness(bitmap, 0.2);
Bitmap nowThisBitmapLooksWeird = bmp.contrast(brightBitmap, 1.5);
Bitmap finalBitmap = bmp.adjustColor(nowThisBitmapLooksWeird, saturation: 1.0);
```

### 3. Displaying/saving/painting the output

## Performance improvements and Dart FFI

### Isolates

Most of the manipulations on the bitmap takes a really long time to be completed. That's is because they have to iterate on every item of the bitmap.
A picture with 400px width and height will generate a list 640000 integers.  This is heavy computation.
Those can be expensive. Sou you may use [Isolates](https://www.didierboelens.com/2019/01/futures---isolates---event-loop/) there to free the ui thread from all of this work.

Check the [example app](https://github.com/renancaraujo/bitmap), where the transformations are applied through the compute function. 

**Important: it is noticed that the performance increases a lot when using release mode on your Flutter App**

### Dart FFI

The capability of calling a `c` (or `c++`) function from dart can help us a lot in getter better performance times.

**Status**: [The FFI is still in development](https://dart.dev/guides/libraries/c-interop), and there is no optimal way to pass a list to a `c` function.
So the time we gain in teh pixel computation we lose when putting every pixel on a pointer.

All Bitmap FFI experiments are being tested in [this branch](https://github.com/renancaraujo/bitmap/pull/4).

## Apps using it (only one for now)

- [Lets Picture](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture) - [Play store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=app.letspicture.letspicture) and the [source code](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture).

## Supported operations

- Flip vertical
- Flip horizontal
- Resize (nearest interpolation)
- Contrast
- Brightness
- Saturation
- Exposure

## Todo

There is a lot of work to be done:

- [ ] Set channel
- [ ] White balance
- [ ] Color blend
- [ ] Noise
- [ ] Tones
- [ ] ??? The sky is the limit

Commit message:

FFI start (#4)
* transform into plugin

* ffi

* add brigtness implemmentation

* remove cursing

* make FFI fast

* brigness working

* brigness working

* remove print

* contrast

* adjust color

* code refinements

README.md, after:

# Flutter Bitmap

A minimalist [Flutter](https://flutter.dev/) package to help bitmaps operations.
The focus here is to provide a cool bitmap manipulation interface.

![transform image dog](transform.jpg)

The package standard format is [RGBA32](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RGBA_color_space).

For now, things like format encoding, exif and multi-frame images are not the concern of this package. If that is your need, check [`image`](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image).
Some of the algorithms here are heavily inspired by this awesome lib.

## Why this exists?

I started to use [dart image](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image) to create [LetsPicture](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture/) (cool app, check it out) but since the beginning I've noticed that the performance was really bad.
[Dart image](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image) has its own Image format, so between decoding, putting some transformations and then displaying the result on the app you had to convert the image two times (at least).

So this package is just this: We deal [bitmaps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BMP_file_format) (duh) and we focus only on Flutter use cases.

`bitmap` takes some advantages from Flutter:
- Every image is decoded to [RGBA32](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RGBA_color_space) by the framework trough ImageStreamListener, so we can rely on Flutter to do the decode job;
- Dart FFI: we are porting some of our functions to C (or C++) making it blazing fast.
- With this package you can easily take advantage of stuff like [compute](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/foundation/compute.html) ([Isolates](https://www.didierboelens.com/2019/01/futures---isolates---event-loop/)) on only the manipulations you want in order to free the ui thread of heavy computation.
- [Niks](https://github.com/renancaraujo/niks) Want to create your own image editor? Niks and bitmap are awesome for the job.

## Alternatives

#### Dart image

As mentioned previously, [`check on pub`](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/image).

#### Flutter Built in ColorFilter class

Flutter has a powerful [ColorFilter](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-ui/ColorFilter-class.html) class (that came from [skia](https://skia.org/user/api/skpaint_overview#SkColorFilter)) which can be used to put some color corrections when painting stuff on canvas. You can use a matrix to correct color (Some matrix examples [here](https://docs.rainmeter.net/tips/colormatrix-guide/)).
Not every color transformation can be done though the matrix, though. 

## Basic usage

### 1. Image to Bitmap

Everything is around the [Bitmap](https://pub.dev/documentation/bitmap/latest/bitmap/bitmap-library.html) class. You can get an instance of that from any [ImageProvider](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/painting/ImageProvider-class.html).

```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';

Bitmap bitmap = await Bitmap.fromProvider(NetworkImage("http://pudim.com.br/pudim.jpg")); // Notice this is an async operation
```

##### You can create from a headed [Uint8List](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/Uint8List-class.html):

```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';

Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.fromHeadful(imageWidth, imageHeight, theListOfInts); // Not async
```

##### Or a headless:

```dart
Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.fromHeadless(imageWidth, imageHeight, theListOfInts); // Not async
```
This is useful when you are dealing with the [Uint8List](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/Uint8List-class.html) that [ByteData](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/dart-typed_data/ByteData-class.html) generates.

##### You can even create a blank one

```dart
Bitmap bitmap = Bitmap.blank(imageWidth, imageHeight);
```
This creates a black, full transparent bitmap.

### 2. Applying some transformations

Let's put some contrast, brightness and  increase saturation
```dart
import 'package:bitmap/bitmap.dart';
import 'package:bitmap/transformations.dart' as bmp;

Bitmap brightBitmap = bmp.brightness(bitmap, 0.2);
Bitmap nowThisBitmapLooksWeird = bmp.contrast(brightBitmap, 1.5);
Bitmap finalBitmap = bmp.adjustColor(nowThisBitmapLooksWeird, saturation: 1.0);
```

### 3. Displaying/saving/painting the output

## Performance improvements and Dart FFI

### Dart FFI

The capability of calling a `c` (or `c++`) function from dart can help us a lot in getter better performance times.

**Status**: [The FFI is still in development](https://dart.dev/guides/libraries/c-interop), but some of our functions are being ported to `C++`, making it blazing fast.

### Isolates

Most of the manipulations on the bitmap takes a really long time to be completed. That's is because they have to iterate on every item of the bitmap.
A picture with 400px width and height will generate a list 640000 integers.  This is heavy computation.
Those can be expensive. Sou you may use [Isolates](https://www.didierboelens.com/2019/01/futures---isolates---event-loop/) there to free the ui thread from all of this work.

Check the [example app](https://github.com/renancaraujo/bitmap), where the transformations are applied through the compute function. 

**Important: it is noticed that the performance increases a lot when using release mode on your Flutter App**

## Apps using it (only one for now)

- [Lets Picture](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture) - [Play store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=app.letspicture.letspicture) and the [source code](https://github.com/renancaraujo/letspicture).

## Supported operations

- Flip vertical
- Flip horizontal
- Resize (nearest interpolation)
- Contrast
- Brightness
- Saturation
- Exposure

## Todo

There is a lot of work to be done:

- [ ] Resize with other interpolations
- [ ] Set channel
- [ ] White balance
- [ ] Color blend
- [ ] Noise
- [ ] Tones
- [ ] ??? The sky is the limit
